https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IgfEyE2VxzA


Personally I think the
one that makes the biggest difference is
empathy having empathy for your
customers and your users and really
being able to understand how do I spend
time with those users and those
customers to be able to understand what
drives them in their work you know what
is or in their usage of my product you
know may not be a business scenario
might be consumer product to
it's about understanding what are they
trying to achieve with this bit of
technology that they're using is it that
they want to just click some buttons get
a result and go home is it that they
won't use this technology to make a
connection with another person somewhere
is it that they want to use the
technology to you know change something
in the way that they do business with
their customers understanding what are
those goals that those those users have
got and then being able to empathize
with the other constraints they have on
their time or the skill set or you know
the environment that they're working in
you know whether they're there's
somebody sitting at a desk working at a
PC or whether they're out on a mobile
device somewhere or whether they're
sitting on a couch
you know using something from from 20
feet away you know being able to really
understand all of those yeah constraints
um requirements that users have and
being able to translate that into how
best do we build a product and build
features to to help them in the third
question that I asked was if you could
go back in time if you could go back and
tell one thing - you're about to
graduate from college self if you could
go back to your past self and tell them
one thing about being a program manager
at Microsoft what would it be so
Microsoft has a ton of smart people who
know more than you do and I've been
working on your product even before it
was a product and if I could go back and
tell myself that one thing it would
probably still be to push myself to ask
more questions and err on the side of
giving and receiving over explanations
to make sure that everyone is on the
same page when you're working with other
teams and when you're in meetings and on
the other side everyone is definitely
very busy and is working hard so people
are generally pretty open with sharing
their knowledge and taking the time to
chat with you and make sure that you
have a better understanding of the of
the scope and the area so something that
somebody somebody told me many many many
many years ago that really really stuck
was about choosing the energy levels
that you bring to work we did this weird
felt very Airy fairy at the time
exercise where there's a bunch of us you
know going through some introductory
training we got given the card randomly
have a normal deck of cards and they
said okay we're gonna do some little
presentations or whatever you can talk
about whatever topic you want something
you're interested and what you have a
dinner last night whatever it was but
match your energy levels to the value
that you chose on your card or that you
got given on your card so if you've got
a two or three doing really kind of
low-energy and don't panic don't be
excited and if you've got one of the
picture cards you got like a king or a
queen whatever it is you're doing right
and the card that you choose determines
it so we do this thing and I got a jack
so I'm like okay that's pretty good high
level of energy but not over-the-top and
I realized that that applies in all of
my work day to day that I can choose how
much energy I'm putting in even if I've
had a really rubbish day and I've had a
really hard time getting my head around
whatever problem is we're trying to
solve I can still come to work choose it
to be energetic if I need to be and
there's a balance right because
sometimes you want to make take a more
measured approach and you want to get a
point across in the way that you're
explaining what you do or explaining
what feedback you've got from a customer
where you want to be a bit more measured
and being able to choose and swap
between those was a really useful skill
developed quite early on and if I'd been
able to you know hit that hour they hear
that from kind of day one being a p.m. I
think that would have helped me be more
successful
I hope this has been useful if you have
any additional questions about being a
program manager at Microsoft please put
them into the comments below can't wait
to hear what you think and once you join
Microsoft please look me up love to talk
to you